Peanut Corporation of America (PCA) was an American peanut -processing business which is now defunct as a result of one of the most widespread and lethal food-borne contamination events in U.S. history.

PCA was founded in 1977 and initially run by Hugh Parnell with three sons, including Stewart Parnell. The company was sold in 1994–1995 with Hugh Parnell retiring and Stewart Parnell and others remaining with the new company as consultants. In 2000, PCA was bought back by Stewart Parnell in a private sale. PCA came to operate processing facilities in Blakely, Georgia , Suffolk, Virginia , and Plainview, Texas , providing peanut and peanut butter products primarily to the "institutional food" market (schools, prisons and nursing homes ), to food manufacturers for use in cookies, snacks, ice cream, and dog treats, and to other markets.

By 2007, PCA had grown to 90 employees and $25   million in annual sales. It has been estimated to have been manufacturing roughly 2.5% of processed peanuts in the U.S. at that time.

PCA permanently halted its operations after it was found to be the source of a Salmonella outbreak in the U.S., during late 2008 and early 2009. The 2008 contamination followed a long history of food quality issues. There had been concerns about sanitation at the company since at least the mid-1980s, when the company was run by Hugh Parnell. In the years just prior to its sale and Hugh Parnell's retirement, PCA was sued: by American Candy Company in 1990, and by Zachary Confections Inc. of Frankfort, Indiana in 1991, after discovery that PCA's peanut products had exceeded the FDA tolerance level for aflatoxin , a mold-derived toxin common to peanuts. After the contamination event, investigations showed that some PCA processing was being done without FDA knowledge and oversight, and other food handling and processing areas had gone long periods without federal inspection.

In late 2008 and early 2009, as a result of the Salmonella contamination event, nine people died and at least 714 people fell ill from food poisoning after eating products containing contaminated peanuts. This contamination triggered the most extensive food recall in U.S. history up to that time, involving 46 states, more than 360 companies, and more than 3,900 different products manufactured using PCA ingredients. The contamination and recall had immediate major ramifications for the market of this set of farm products. On February 13, 2009, Peanut Corporation of America ceased all manufacturing and business operations, and filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy liquidation. As of February 2009, a federal criminal investigation was continuing, and at least a dozen civil lawsuits had been filed. In September 2015, Stewart Parnell was sentenced to 28 years in federal prison for his role in the nationwide outbreak. Stewart's brother, Michael Parnell, was sentenced to 20 years in prison.

Scope of business

Hugh Parnell Sr. founded Parnell's Peanuts, in Gorman, Texas in 1977 selling to consumers, bakeries and manufacturers (candy, ice cream, and snacks). The company was sold in 1994–1995, with Hugh Parnell retiring and Stewart Parnell and the others remaining as consultants. In 2000, PCA was bought back by Stewart Parnell in a private sale. At this time, PCA operated processing facilities in Blakely, Georgia , Suffolk, Virginia , and Plainview, Texas , providing peanuts, peanut butter, peanut meal, and peanut paste to an institutional food market —to schools, prisons , and nursing homes —as well as to low-budget retail outlets such as dollar stores and to food manufacturers for use in cookies, snacks, ice cream, and dog treats. PCA was estimated to have manufactured roughly 2.5% of processed peanuts in the U.S. at its height, with 90 employees and $25   million in annual sales in 2007.

In 1990 the FDA found PCA was distributing peanuts with high levels of aflatoxins, caused by mold that grows in nuts and seeds. In 1992 the American Candy Company sued PCA for lost inventory that had used PCA nuts contaminated with aflatoxins. The company filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and permanently halted its processing and sales operations, after being found to be the source of a massive Salmonella outbreak in the United States beginning in 2008.

Salmonella contamination of products

In late 2008 and early 2009, nine people died and at least 714 people fell ill due to food poisoning from eating products containing contaminated peanuts supplied by the Peanut Corporation of America (PCA). The real numbers were believed to be much higher, since for every reported case of salmonellosis, on average, another 30 or so cases went unreported, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). A combination of epidemiological analysis and laboratory testing by state officials in Minnesota and Connecticut , the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the CDC confirmed that the sources of the outbreak of illnesses caused by Salmonella typhimurium were peanut butter, peanut paste , and peanut meal produced by the PCA at its Blakely, Georgia , processing plant.

On February 7, 2009, Oregon officials confirmed the first case of salmonellosis in a dog that had eaten biscuits contaminated with the PCA-produced peanut products.

In January 2009, the company issued a statement categorically denying the allegations; in that same month, it shut down production and laid off 50 employees at the Blakely plant. In September 2015, the company owner and his brother received prison sentences along with other executives.

Owner

Peanut Corporation of America was founded and originally owned by Hugh Parnell, father of Stewart Parnell, but by the time of the contamination scandal had passed to Stewart as sole owner, and as president and CEO of the company.

Hugh Parnell started in the peanut business with Stewart Parnell and his two younger brothers in 1977; they took a struggling, $50,000-a-year peanut roasting operation and turned it into a $30   million business before selling the business in 1994–1995, after which Stewart Parnell continued on as a consultant until re-buying the Gorman, Texas, plant in 2000. In 2001, he bought the Blakely, Georgia, operation, when its operations consisted only of roasting and blanching peanuts. Parnell tripled revenue at the Blakely plant by 2004, turning its first profit in 15 years, with production regularly surpassing 2.5   million pounds of peanuts per month. However, the FDA did not know that the plant manufactured peanut butter until the 2008-2009 outbreak.

The Parnells ran PCA on a very tight budget. The company under Hugh Parnell operated a bare-bones front office and used minimum-wage labor, a style that was continued by Stewart Parnell, who ran PCA from a converted garage behind his home in an upscale suburb outside of Lynchburg, Virginia, and continued to rely on minimum-wage labor.

Despite more than 12 tests between 2007 and 2008 that showed Salmonella contamination in his company's products, Stewart Parnell wrote an email to company employees on January 12, 2009, that stated, "We have never found any salmonella at all. No salmonella has been found anywhere in our products or in our plants." Parnell ordered products identified with Salmonella to be shipped and complained that tests discovering the contaminated food were "costing us huge $$$$$." In a June 2008 email exchange, Parnell complained to a worker after being notified that Salmonella had been found in more products. "I go thru this about once a week," he wrote. "I will hold my breath ... again." After the company was identified as the source of the outbreak, Parnell pressed federal regulators to allow him to continue using peanuts from the tainted plant. He wrote that company executives "desperately at least need to turn the raw peanuts on our floor into money."

Media

In 2015, Food Republic produced and aired Food Crimes : "P.B. & Jail."

On July 3, 2017, CNBC aired an episode of American Greed : "From Peanuts to Sick Millions” [Documentary / Crime]. Season ll, Episode AG 141.
